Add the 2201.3.0 release note to the release note branch (#5937)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.3.0/RELEASE_NOTE.md

## Update Ballerina

**If you are already using Ballerina 2201.0.0 (Swan Lake)**, run either of the commands below to directly update to 2201.3.0 using the [Ballerina Update Tool](/learn/cli-documentation/update-tool/).

`bal dist update` (or `bal dist pull 2201.3.0`)

**If you are using a version below 2201.0.0 (Swan Lake)**, run the commands below to update to 2201.3.0.

1. Run `bal update` to get the latest version of the Update Tool.

2. Run `bal dist update` ( or `bal dist pull 2201.3.0`) to update your Ballerina version to 2201.3.0.

However, if you are using a version below 2201.0.0 (Swan Lake) and if you already ran `bal dist update` (or `bal dist pull 2201.3.0`) before `bal update`, see [Troubleshooting](/downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.0.0#troubleshooting) to recover your installation.

## Install Ballerina

If you have not installed Ballerina, then download the [installers](/downloads/#swanlake) to install.

> ## Migrate from Swan Lake Beta releases

Reviewer: Why we need this section?

Author: Removed.

>**Info:** If you have been using Swan Lake Beta releases, delete the `Dependencies.toml` files in your Ballerina packages when migrating to Ballerina 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake). 

A few backward-incompatible changes have been introduced during the Swan Lake Beta program, and thereby, some of your existing packages may not compile with Ballerina 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake). Therefore, you need to delete the `Dependencies.toml` file to force the dependency resolver to use the latest versions of your dependencies. 

## Language updates

### New features

#### Added a new field to the `display` annotation

A new field named `kind` has been introduced to the `display` annotation to indicate the kind of data. Allowed values are `text`, `password`, and `file`.

```ballerina
public type RefreshTokenGrantConfig record {|
    @display {
        iconPath: "Field.icon",
        label: "clientSecret field",
        kind: "password"
    }
    string clientSecret;
|};

> ```

Reviewer 2: Shall we make this the last item under new language features? IMO, this isn't quite relevant to Ballerina users.

Author: done.

> #### Added support for function pointers with defaultable parameters

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be function types? @chiranSachintha 

The spec doesn't use this term.

> Function pointers are now allowed with default values for parameters. Any expression can be used as the default value of a function pointer parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Default values are now allowed for parameters of function pointers.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

public function main() {
    int num1 = 100;
    int num2 = 50;
    int num3 = 25;
    function (int a = 0, int b = 0, int c = 0) returns int total = getSum;

    io:println(total()); // Prints `0`.
    io:println(total(num1, num2)); // Prints `150`.
    io:println(total(num1, num2, num3)); // Prints `175`.
}

function getSum(int num1, int num2, int num3) returns int {
    return num1 + num2 + num3;
}
```

### Improvements

#### More improvements on working with optional fields

> If there is an optional `T x?;` field in a record, the absence of `x` is represented by nil where `T` does not allow nil.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is an optional `T x?;` field in a record, the absence of `x` is represented by `nil` where `T` does not allow `nil`.
```

Reviewer 2: nil is not a keyword, so I don't think we need to emphasize it.

> If there is an optional `T x?;` field in a record, the absence of `x` is represented by nil where `T` does not allow nil.

Reviewer 2: This does not explain the feature. Let's fix. @KavinduZoysa

Author: Updated.

> If there is an optional `T x?;` field in a record, the absence of `x` is represented by nil where `T` does not allow nil.

Reviewer 3: Previously, there is no way to represent the absence of an optional field. Therefore, the following case does not work.
```suggestion
If there is an optional `T x?;` field in a record, the absence of `x` is represented by nil where `T` does not allow nil.
```

```ballerina
type Topt record {
   int x?;
   int y?;
};

function foo() {    
    Topt t = {x: 2};
    var { x, y } = t;
}
```
But with this new feature, the absence of an optional field can be represented by nil

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

type Employee record {
    int id?;
    string department?;
};

public function main() {
    Employee e = {id: 2, department: "HR"};

>     e.id = ();

Reviewer 2: Please add in-line comments to emphasize the new feature.

Author: @KavinduZoysa

Author: Done in the comments below.

>     e.id = ();

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    e.id = (); // Remove the optional field `id`
```

    e = {id: 3};

>     var {id: _, department} = e;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    var {id: _, department} = e; // Even if the optional field `department` is absent in `e`, 
```

    io:println(department is ()); // true

    int? idOrNil = ();

>     e = {id: idOrNil, department: "Engineering"};

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    e = {id: idOrNil, department: "Engineering"}; // nil value can be used to represent the absence of optional field `id`
```

    io:println(e.id is ()); // true
}

```

#### Allow an optional terminating semicolon for module-level declarations

Previously, a closing semicolon was not allowed after the module-level declarations below.
- block function body
- service declaration
- module class definition
- module enumeration declaration 

Now, optionally, you can end these declarations with a semicolon.

### Backward-incompatible changes

#### Disallow using the `-9223372036854775808` unary expression as an integer

> Previously, `-9223372036854775808` was allowed to be assigned to an integer in Ballerina. However, according to the language specification, `-9223372036854775808` is considered a unary expression, which requires the expression after `-` to be a valid value for `int`. Therefore, `-9223372036854775808` now results in a compilation error since `9223372036854775808` is out of range for `int`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, `-9223372036854775808` was allowed to be used as an integer in Ballerina. However, according to the language specification, `-9223372036854775808` is considered a unary expression, which requires the expression after `-` to be a valid value for `int`. Therefore, `-9223372036854775808` now results in a compilation error since `9223372036854775808` is out of range for `int`.
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```ballerina
````

}
```

## Compiler API updates

### New features

#### Semantic API
- Added a new `annotAttachments()` API to get the annotation attachments and their constant values from the annotatable symbols
- Introduced a new `ClientDeclSymbol` symbol to represent the semantic information of the client-declaration statement

### Improvements

#### Semantic API
Improved the `constValue()` method to retrieve the constant value as an object from the constant symbol

#### Syntax API

Added a few methods to the `NodeParser` API. The methods below have been introduced for the `NodeParser` class.
  - `Node parseObjectMember(String text)`
  - `ModulePartNode parseModulePart(String text)`
  - `IntermediateClauseNode parseIntermediateClause(String text, boolean allowActions)`

### Backward-incompatible changes

Updated the `NodeFactory` methods to allow optional terminating semicolons for module-level declarations. The methods below in the `NodeFactory` have been updated with an extra parameter for the optional semicolon token.

  - `createServiceDeclarationNode`
  - `createFunctionBodyBlockNode`
  - `createEnumDeclarationNode`
  - `createClassDefinitionNode`

### Bug fixes

> To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFETools+label%3AType%2FBug+).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFE+is%3Aclosed).
```

> To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFE+is%3Aclosed).

Reviewer: Invalid link for Compiler API area as this points to compilerFE

Author: Should we remove this also? @MaryamZi @gimantha @hasithaa

Author: Updated with the `CompilerFE Tools` link.

> ## Compiler API updates

Reviewer: Why are we having repetitive section named `Compiler API updates`?

Author: Is it incorrect to have `Language updates` and `Compiler updates` as 2 separate sections? @hasithaa @gimantha @MaryamZi

Author: Removed the duplicate section.

    boolean hunts?;
};

type Pet PetByAge|PetByType;

public function main() {
    json j = {
        "nickname": "Fido",
        "pet_type": "Dog",
        "age": 4
    };
    Pet|error pet = j.fromJsonWithType(); // inherent type of pet will be PetByAge

    j = {x: 1};
    record {float x;}|record {int x;}|error v = j.cloneWithType(); // inherent type of v will be record {int x;}
}
```

#### Configurable support for the array of tables

The configurable feature is improved to support the array of tables using a two-dimensional TOML array of in-line tables.

For example, if the configurable variables are defined in the following way,

```ballerina
type Person record {
    readonly int id;
    string name;
};

configurable table<map<int>>[] array1 = ?;
configurable table<Person> key (id)[] array2 = ?;
```

the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.

```toml
array1 = [[{a = 1, b = 2}, {c = 3, d = 4}], [{e = 5, f = 6}]]

array2 = [[{id = 1, name = "Anne"}, {id = 2, name = "Bob"}], [{id = 3, name = "Charles"}]]

```

#### Configurable support for the `nil` type

The configurable feature is now improved to support the following `()` cases.

> - configurable variables of `nil` type 

Reviewer: Line break is not appearing after this line.

Author: Done.

> - configurable variables of `nil` type 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configurable variables of `nil` type 
```

> The configurable variables of the `nil` type are now supported if the configuration is optional.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we indent this to match with bullet point?

Author: Done.

> For example, the following will be initialized with the default values without providing a compilation error.

Reviewer: Same as above.

Author: Done.

> ```ballerina

Reviewer: Same as above.

Author: Done.

configurable () nilValue = ();
configurable ())[] nilArray = [];
```

> - record fields with `nil` type

Reviewer: Line break is not appearing after this line.

Author: Fixed. Anyway, these will be added and managed automatically by the website CSS styles.

> - record fields with `nil` type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Record fields with `nil` type
```

> The record fields of `nil` type or a union of `nil` are now supported by the configurable feature only if the field contains a default value.

Reviewer: The below text adn code should be indented to match with bullet.

Author: Done.

- Added a grace period for the graceful stop of the listener
- Added the missing HTTP status codes
- Made the socket configuration to be configurable in both listener and client configurations
- Added defaultable parameter support for query parameters
- Added support for populating the HATEOAS link's `types` field based on the resource return type

#### `graphql` package

- Added support for disabling introspection queries
- Added support for GraphQL interfaces
- Added support for interfaces implementing interfaces
- Introduced GraphQL client configurations

#### `gRPC` package

- Added server reflection support for gRPC services

### Improvements

##### `http` package

- Reduced the listener default timeout to 60s and client default timeout to 30s
- Improved data binding based on the MIME type match

#### `graphql` package

- Added service-level interceptor execution for records fields, maps, and tables
- Added service-level interceptor execution for subscriptions
- Changed to return all the errors related to a GraphQL document in a single response

#### `gRPC` package

- Updated Protocol Buffers version to 3.21.7

### Bug fixes

> To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%222201.3.0%22+label%3AType%2FBug)

Reviewer: Empty issues. Please check.

Author: The link is correct. Issues will be tagged with the milestone.

Author: @daneshk @shafreenAnfar

Author: @ThisaruGuruge confirmed the link as: https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed

## Developer tools updates

> ### New features

Reviewer 5: @lnash94 Can you verify that we have updated all the releases notes related to the openAPI tool?

Reviewer 6: We had to revert openAPI release note changes since the IDL feature is not going to add to update 03. Then there are no new features from openAPI tool for update 03. :)  Please find the PR https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-release/pull/2193
Already updated the link with bug fixes. https://github.com/ballerina-platform/openapi-tools/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%22Swan+Lake+2201.3.0%22+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed

Author: Resolved as per the above comment.

#### Language Server

- Introduced a new `Extract to local variable` code action

> - Introduced a new `Extract to function` code action

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Introduced a new `Extract to constant` code action
- Introduced a new `Extract to function` code action
- Introduced a new code action to convert an array to array mapping into a query expression
```
Need to add 2 new code actions (2 new lines) as above

- Introduced the `loadProject()` API to the workspace manager to open up a project programmatically

> - Introduced a new `Generate module for client declaration` code action to generate a module for client declarations

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
Should remove this item since we reverted this feature

#### CLI

##### Native-image build (Experimental)

Introduced the `--native` flag, which generates a GraalVM native executable when building a Ballerina project.

- The generated executable contains the modules in the current package, their dependencies, Ballerina runtime, and statically linked native code from the JDK

- The new CLI command will be `bal build --native`

>**Note:** There is a known [issue](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues/38665) in the native image build when using locks along with loops. 

#### Debugger

> Introduced the `run-in-terminal` feature, which provides the capability to debug Ballerina programs (that take user inputs) in the launch mode. This can be achieved by setting the `terminal` attribute in the launch configurations to `integrated`. Once the configuration is set, launching the debugger will cause the Ballerina programs to be executed in a separate integrated VS Code terminal.

Reviewer 5: @praneesha Shall we remove the parenthesis here, as what's within the parenthesis is more important when talking about the feature?
```suggestion
Introduced the `run-in-terminal` feature, which provides the capability to debug Ballerina programs that take user inputs, in the launch mode. This can be achieved by setting the `terminal` attribute in the launch configurations to `integrated`. Once the configuration is set, launching the debugger will cause the Ballerina programs to be executed in a separate integrated VS Code terminal.
```

### Improvements

#### Language Server

- Improved completion sorting within the expression of the `if` condition
- Improved the `Change variable type` code action

#### GraphQL Tool

- Introduced single client generation for a single schema definition
- Improved the GraphQL client config generation to support runtime configurability

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake) of the repositories below.

- [Language Server](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer)
- [OpenAPI](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/openapi-tools/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%22Swan+Lake+2201.3.0%22+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed)

> - [ProjectAPI](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3ATeam%2FDevTools+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AArea%2FProjectAPI)

Reviewer 8: Shall we remove this line since there are no `project-api` bug fixes for update3

Author: Removed.

    return num1 + num2 + num3;
}
```

#### Added a new field to the `display` annotation

A new field named `kind` has been introduced to the `display` annotation to indicate the kind of data. Allowed values are `text`, `password`, and `file`.

```ballerina
public type RefreshTokenGrantConfig record {|
    @display {
        iconPath: "Field.icon",
        label: "clientSecret field",
        kind: "password"
    }
    string clientSecret;
|};
```

### Improvements

#### Improved handling of optional field values

With this new feature,

- a record that contains optional fields can be destructured. If the optional field is not available, the type of the variable becomes nil.
- a variable of type `T?` can be used to construct an optional field. If the value is `()`, it effectively means that that the field is not there.
- the optional field value can be removed from the record by assigning `()` to the optional field.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

type Employee record {
    int id?;
    string department?;
};

public function main() {
    Employee e = {id: 2, department: "HR"};
    e.id = (); // Remove the optional field `id`
    e = {id: 3};

>     var {id: _, department} = e; // Even if the optional field `department` is absent in `e`, nil value can be assigned to `department`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    var {id: _, department} = e; // Even if `department` is absent in `e`, the value of `department` is nil.
```

    boolean hunts?;
};

type Pet PetByAge|PetByType;

public function main() {
    json j = {
        "nickname": "Fido",
        "pet_type": "Dog",
        "age": 4
    };
    Pet|error pet = j.fromJsonWithType(); // inherent type of pet will be PetByAge

    j = {x: 1};
    record {float x;}|record {int x;}|error v = j.cloneWithType(); // inherent type of v will be record {int x;}
}
```

#### Configurable support for the array of tables

The configurable feature is improved to support the array of tables using a two-dimensional TOML array of in-line tables.

For example, if the configurable variables are defined in the following way,

```ballerina
type Person record {
    readonly int id;
    string name;
};

configurable table<map<int>>[] array1 = ?;
configurable table<Person> key (id)[] array2 = ?;
```

the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.

```toml
array1 = [[{a = 1, b = 2}, {c = 3, d = 4}], [{e = 5, f = 6}]]

array2 = [[{id = 1, name = "Anne"}, {id = 2, name = "Bob"}], [{id = 3, name = "Charles"}]]

```

#### Configurable support for the nil type

The configurable feature is now improved to support the following `()` cases.

> - Configurable variables of nil type 

Author: We shouldn't as per the above comment.

    string? name;
    string login;
|};

public function main() {
    Login[] logins = [
        {userId: 6789, time: "20:10:23"},
        {userId: 1234, time: "10:30:02"},
        {userId: 3987, time: "12:05:00"}
    ];

    table<User> key(id) users = table [
            {id: 1234, name: "Keith"},
            {id: 6789, name: "Anne"}
        ];

    Entry[] entities = from var login in logins
        outer join var user in users
        on login.userId equals user?.id
        select {name: user?.name, login: login.time};

    // Now, the code below gives an error at the typed binding pattern of the outer join clause.
    entities = from var login in logins
        outer join User user in users  // error: outer join must be declared with 'var'
        on login.userId equals user.id
        select {name: user?.name, login: login.time};
}
```

#### Disallow method calls with record fields of function types

Previously, method calls were allowed with record fields of function types similar to object fields. This has now been disallowed since it is not allowed by the language specification.

```ballerina
type Foo record {|
    function (int a, int b) returns int func;

> |};

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|};

```

## Update Ballerina

**If you are already using Ballerina 2201.0.0 (Swan Lake)**, run either of the commands below to directly update to 2201.3.0 using the [Ballerina Update Tool](/learn/cli-documentation/update-tool/).

`bal dist update` (or `bal dist pull 2201.3.0`)

**If you are using a version below 2201.0.0 (Swan Lake)**, run the commands below to update to 2201.3.0.

1. Run `bal update` to get the latest version of the Update Tool.

2. Run `bal dist update` ( or `bal dist pull 2201.3.0`) to update your Ballerina version to 2201.3.0.

However, if you are using a version below 2201.0.0 (Swan Lake) and if you already ran `bal dist update` (or `bal dist pull 2201.3.0`) before `bal update`, see [Troubleshooting](/downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.0.0#troubleshooting) to recover your installation.

## Install Ballerina

If you have not installed Ballerina, then download the [installers](/downloads/#swanlake) to install.

> ## Language updates

Reviewer: @hasithaa / @gimantha Why we don't have a `Bug fixes` section for `Language updates`?  Seems we have closed 50 bugs? https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed

Author: Added.

### New features

#### Added support for function types with defaultable parameters

Default values are now allowed for parameters of function types.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

public function main() {
    int num1 = 100;
    int num2 = 50;
    int num3 = 25;
    function (int a = 0, int b = 0, int c = 0) returns int total = getSum;

    io:println(total()); // Prints `0`.
    io:println(total(num1, num2)); // Prints `150`.
    io:println(total(num1, num2, num3)); // Prints `175`.
}

function getSum(int num1, int num2, int num3) returns int {
    return num1 + num2 + num3;
}
```

#### Added a new field to the `display` annotation

A new field named `kind` has been introduced to the `display` annotation to indicate the kind of data. Allowed values are `text`, `password`, and `file`.

```ballerina
public type RefreshTokenGrantConfig record {|
    @display {
        iconPath: "Field.icon",
        label: "clientSecret field",
        kind: "password"
    }
    string clientSecret;
|};
```

### Improvements

> #### More improvements on working with optional fields

Reviewer: Since this is under `Improvements`  title do we need to say `More improvements...`. Instead should we be more precise on what type of improvements on optional fields? @MaryamZi / @hasithaa

Reviewer 2: I think it's a bit difficult to include all the changes as a concise title. We'll check again anyway.

Author: @MaryamZi - Can we finalize this, please?

Author: Updated via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/5937/commits/94e875a8a11fbca9a1ff74d27c690b33495c6de4.

> Previously, there is no way to represent the absence of an optional field. Therefore, the following case does not work.

Reviewer 2: Still not correct, IMO. Aren't we talking about destructuring here?

Reviewer 2: Also doesn't reflect that the following is allowed now. We don't have to say "Therefore, the following case does not work.". We just need to demonstrate what is new.

@KavinduZoysa

Author: Updated via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/5937/commits/94e875a8a11fbca9a1ff74d27c690b33495c6de4.

```ballerina
type Topt record {
   int x?;
   int y?;
};

function foo() {    
    Topt t = {x: 2};
    var { x, y } = t;
}
```

> However, with this new feature, the absence of an optional field can be represented by nil as shown below.

Reviewer 2: Again we can describe the actual feature.

Author: @KavinduZoysa

Author: Updated via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/5937/commits/94e875a8a11fbca9a1ff74d27c690b33495c6de4.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

type Employee record {
    int id?;
    string department?;
};

public function main() {
    Employee e = {id: 2, department: "HR"};
    e.id = (); // Remove the optional field `id`
    e = {id: 3};

>     var {id: _, department} = e; // Even if the optional field `department` is absent in `e`, 

Reviewer 2: The comment is not a complete sentence.

Author: Updated in Kavindu's comment below.

>     var {id: _, department} = e; // Even if the optional field `department` is absent in `e`, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    var {id: _, department} = e; // Even if the optional field `department` is absent in `e`, nil value can be assigned to `department`
```

    io:println(department is ()); // true

    int? idOrNil = ();
    e = {id: idOrNil, department: "Engineering"}; // nil value can be used to represent the absence of optional field `id`

>     io:println(e.id is ()); // true

Reviewer 2: `e.hasKey("id")` is better here. Because with the current check it may be misleading to say that the field is present and the value is nil.

Author: Updated in Kavindu's comment below.

>     io:println(e.id is ()); // true

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    io:println(e.hasKey("id")); // false
```

### Improvements

#### Semantic API
Improved the `constValue()` method to retrieve the constant value as an object from the constant symbol

#### Syntax API

Added a few methods to the `NodeParser` API. The methods below have been introduced for the `NodeParser` class.
  - `Node parseObjectMember(String text)`
  - `ModulePartNode parseModulePart(String text)`
  - `IntermediateClauseNode parseIntermediateClause(String text, boolean allowActions)`

### Backward-incompatible changes

Updated the `NodeFactory` methods to allow optional terminating semicolons for module-level declarations. The methods below in the `NodeFactory` have been updated with an extra parameter for the optional semicolon token.

  - `createServiceDeclarationNode`
  - `createFunctionBodyBlockNode`
  - `createEnumDeclarationNode`
  - `createClassDefinitionNode`

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFETools+).

## Runtime updates

### Improvements

> #### Strand dump showing the total strand count

Reviewer: Shouldn't we rename this to `Show the total strand count in strand dump` for consistency? @praneesha / @warunalakshitha ?

Author: Changed.

#### CLI

##### Native-image build (Experimental)

Introduced the `--native` flag, which generates a GraalVM native executable when building a Ballerina project.

- The generated executable contains the modules in the current package, their dependencies, Ballerina runtime, and statically linked native code from the JDK

- The new CLI command will be `bal build --native`

>**Note:** There is a known [issue](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues/38665) in the native image build when using locks along with loops. 

#### Debugger

Introduced the `run-in-terminal` feature, which provides the capability to debug Ballerina programs that take user inputs in the launch mode. This can be achieved by setting the `terminal` attribute in the launch configurations to `integrated`. Once the configuration is set, launching the debugger will cause the Ballerina programs to be executed in a separate integrated VS Code terminal.

### Improvements

#### Language Server

- Improved completion sorting within the expression of the `if` condition
- Improved the `Change variable type` code action

#### OpenAPI Tool

> Changed the default behaviour of the OpenAPI client generation to generate `resource` functions instead of `remote` functions. If you need to generate a `remote` function, use the `--client-methods=remote` flag in the OpenAPI to Ballerina CLI commands.

Reviewer 5: Shall we change this to something like below? @praneesha WDYT?
```suggestion
- Improved CLI client generation to generate Ballerina client resource functions by default. (However, the users can use `--client-methods=remote` command option to switch back to client remote functions instead.)
```

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Improved CLI client generation to generate the Ballerina client resource methods by default. (However, the users can use `--client-methods=remote` command option to switch back to client remote functions instead.)
```

#### GraphQL Tool

- Introduced single client generation for a single schema definition
- Improved the GraphQL client config generation to support runtime configurability

> ### Bug fixes

Reviewer: Why are we not including the Debugger bug fixes here? @NipunaRanasinghe https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3AArea%2FDebugger

Author: Added.

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake) of the repositories below.

- [Language Server](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer)
- [OpenAPI](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/openapi-tools/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%22Swan+Lake+2201.3.0%22+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed)

> - [Semantic API](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AArea%2FSemanticAPI+)

Reviewer: Semantic API improvements and new features are listed under the main title of `Compiler API updates`. (https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/blob/3ccd52ea52812ecf78b1b2072078893243971d7a/downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.3.0/RELEASE_NOTE.md#compiler-api-updates) Then why are we adding only the bug fixes under `Developer tools updates` section? Also link is incorrect as it is not filtered by bugs. 

@praneesha / @mohanvive

Author: @mohanvive - What is the difference between the 2 links below:

1. https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AArea%2FSemanticAPI+
2. https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFETools+

Which one should we put as the bug fixes milestone link under the `Compiler API updates` section?

Reviewer 9: `CompilerFETools` label is a broader one. `SemancticAPI` is just one of the compiler API tools.
It seems, under the compiler API updates we list all kinds of compiler API changes. Not only the Semantic API. Hence the filter should consider `CompilerFETools`. Further. since we are planning to list down the bugs we could use that specific label as well. Hence, you could use the below one.

https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFETools

Author: Updated.

#### CLI

##### Native-image build (Experimental)

Introduced the `--native` flag, which generates a GraalVM native executable when building a Ballerina project.

- The generated executable contains the modules in the current package, their dependencies, Ballerina runtime, and statically linked native code from the JDK

- The new CLI command will be `bal build --native`

>**Note:** There is a known [issue](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues/38665) in the native image build when using locks along with loops. 

#### Debugger

Introduced the `run-in-terminal` feature, which provides the capability to debug Ballerina programs that take user inputs, in the launch mode. This can be achieved by setting the `terminal` attribute in the launch configurations to `integrated`. Once the configuration is set, launching the debugger will cause the Ballerina programs to be executed in a separate integrated VS Code terminal.

### Improvements

#### Language Server

- Improved completion sorting within the expression of the `if` condition
- Improved the `Change variable type` code action

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

#### OpenAPI Tool
-  Improved by changing the default behaviour from generating `remote` functions to generating `resource` functions within the client class in OpenAPI to the Ballerina CLI command.

```

Reviewer 6: @NipunaRanasinghe Could you please review?

}

function getSum(int num1, int num2, int num3) returns int {
    return num1 + num2 + num3;
}
```

#### Added a new field to the `display` annotation

A new field named `kind` has been introduced to the `display` annotation to indicate the kind of data. Allowed values are `text`, `password`, and `file`.

```ballerina
public type RefreshTokenGrantConfig record {|
    @display {
        iconPath: "Field.icon",
        label: "clientSecret field",
        kind: "password"
    }
    string clientSecret;
|};
```

### Improvements

#### More improvements on working with optional fields

Previously, there is no way to represent the absence of an optional field. Therefore, the following case does not work.

```ballerina
type Topt record {
   int x?;
   int y?;
};

function foo() {    
    Topt t = {x: 2};
    var { x, y } = t;
}
```

However, with this new feature, the absence of an optional field can be represented by nil as shown below.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;

type Employee record {
    int id?;
    string department?;
};

public function main() {
    Employee e = {id: 2, department: "HR"};
    e.id = (); // Remove the optional field `id`
    e = {id: 3};

>     var {id: _, department} = e; // Even if the optional field `department` is absent in `e`, nil value can be assigned to `department`

Reviewer: These comment lines seems too lengthy, so IINM, horizontal scroll bar will appear in the page. Can we either shorten it or break it?

Author: @KavinduZoysa

Author: Fixed.

    io:println(department is ()); // true

    int? idOrNil = ();

>     e = {id: idOrNil, department: "Engineering"}; // nil value can be used to represent the absence of optional field `id`

Reviewer: Same as above.

Author: @KavinduZoysa

Author: Fixed below.

    Entry[] entities = from var login in logins
        outer join var user in users
        on login.userId equals user?.id
        select {name: user?.name, login: login.time};

    // Now, the code below gives an error at the typed binding pattern of the outer join clause.
    entities = from var login in logins
        outer join User user in users  // error: outer join must be declared with 'var'
        on login.userId equals user.id
        select {name: user?.name, login: login.time};
}
```

#### Disallow method calls with record fields of function types

Previously, method calls were allowed with record fields of function types similar to object fields. This has now been disallowed since it is not allowed by the language specification.

```ballerina
type Foo record {|
    function (int a, int b) returns int func;
|};

function callFunction(Foo foo) {
    int _ = foo.func(1, 2); // error
}
```

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.3.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.3.0+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed).

## Compiler API updates

### New features

#### Semantic API

> Added a new `annotAttachments()` API to get the annotation attachments and their constant values from the annotatable symbols

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Added a new `annotAttachments()` API to get the annotation attachments and their constant values from the annotatable symbols.
```

### Improvements

#### Semantic API

> Improved the `constValue()` method to retrieve the constant value as an object from the constant symbol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Improved the `constValue()` method to retrieve the constant value as an object from the constant symbol.
```

For example, the operations below will not return an error.

```ballerina
type PetByAge record {
    int age;
    string nickname?;
};

type PetByType record {
    "Cat"|"Dog" pet_type;
    boolean hunts?;
};

type Pet PetByAge|PetByType;

public function main() {
    json j = {
        "nickname": "Fido",
        "pet_type": "Dog",
        "age": 4
    };
    Pet|error pet = j.fromJsonWithType(); // inherent type of pet will be PetByAge

    j = {x: 1};
    record {float x;}|record {int x;}|error v = j.cloneWithType(); // inherent type of v will be record {int x;}
}
```

#### Configurable support for the array of tables

The configurable feature is improved to support the array of tables using a two-dimensional TOML array of in-line tables.

> For example, if the configurable variables are defined in the following way,

Reviewer: Isn't it better to avoid half sentences around the code snippets?

Author: @HindujaB @Nadeeshan96 @warunalakshitha

Author: @anupama-pathirage - I think it is fine as it brings more clarity. Any suggestions to improve further?

Reviewer 10: Here we need to mention the mapping between the `bal` code and the `toml` file. Either we can have it like this, or we can have the entire sentence first and then the `bal` and `toml` snippets afterward. 
```suggestion
For example, the configurable variables can be configured in the `Config.toml` file as follows.
<ballerina_code>
<toml_content>
```
IMO, having half sentences will be more clear to understand the mapping.

```ballerina
type Person record {
    readonly int id;
    string name;
};

configurable table<map<int>>[] array1 = ?;
configurable table<Person> key (id)[] array2 = ?;
```

> the values can be provided in the `Config.toml` file as follows.

Reviewer: Isn't it better to avoid half sentences around the code snippets?

Author: @HindujaB @Nadeeshan96 @warunalakshitha

Author: Closing as per the above comment.
